[Music]
welcome to the awk programming language
awk is a special programming language
which looks at the input stream
as consisting of records
and each record consisting of fields
and then you can write program codes
that would operate on each record
at a time
and also selecting what type of a record
should be processed based upon any
pattern or condition that you can supply
though awk is viewed as a scripting
language
it has enough mathematical
functions that you could actually use it
for some of the
routine calculations that you would like
to do
using the command line environment
and awk is an abbreviation
of the names of three people who
developed this language namely aho
weinberger and kerningham
and awk has been adopted by the posix
standard namely ieee
1003.1 hyphen 2008
which is the latest version as of now
and there are many variants of awk with
some enhanced features also
n awk g awk or m awk and so on
on linux what you see would be g awk or
gawk language
but there'd be a
symbolic link from awk to g awk
therefore you could use the programming
language with the awk
as the name of the
executable
and guac has
some features that are extended beyond
what is defined in posix
we do not cover that in this session
but you could look them up using the
manual page on
georg
the execution model of awk is something
that if you understand
then you can actually utilize that
for certain tasks which can reduce a lot
of programming work for you namely
you don't have to open files
or close files you don't have to worry
about
printing out stuff and you don't have to
keep track of which file you are
processing currently which record you
are processing currently how many fields
are there in each record what happens
when you change the field separator all
these tasks are taken care by awk so
that you can focus on your task namely
to look at the fields and do the
processing that you need to do
and it's actually also a very fast
language
and we will see at the end of this
session
that to process millions of records awk
would take just couple of seconds
and also awk can do things that
spreadsheets cannot do
and therefore knowing or could actually
save the day for some of you
now the input stream is looked at as a
set of records and by default the new
line character is used to separate the
records which means that each line in
the input stream is a record however you
can override it and provide any other
set of characters as the
separator for the record and then the
input stream will be split accordingly
for example in a html document
the new lines do not have any special
meaning so you may want to split it
using
html codes
now each record is thought of as
a sequence of fields and therefore to
split the record into fields you can use
a field separator by default
the space character is used as a field
separator you can have multiple spaces
that will not affect the number of
fields
such a cleanup is done by awk directly
and you can also override that by
defining
any other character as a field separator
in fact you can even define
the field separator using the regular
expression so that
it can be picked up from a set of
characters that you are providing so you
can give multiple options which can act
as a field separator which is fairly
unique for the awk language
and there are
code blocks in any awk script
and each code block will be executed
once for every record which satisfies
the pattern that goes with the code
block
so
if you can
understand this concept by using the
examples that i am going to show you
then you would view
the programming of
processing a set of records containing
fields
very differently compared to traditional
way of programming where you open a file
do some action and close it
and by the nature
the number of records is not relevant so
the awk programming model would scale
quite well and you do not have to worry
about the size of the file because it is
processing one record at a time
you can run awk either directly on the
command line using a
single line for the
script or you could keep the source code
for the script in a separate file and
call that file
using the minus f option for the awk
executable
so here is one example where the etc
password file contains
information on the user names their full
names the home directory and
such other information
and you could
see that
such a file would have colon as the
field separator
so what is done by the
one line command that is there in the
screen is to print the user names which
will be coming as a first field of every
line in the etc password file
and you could also achieve the same
thing using the script that is given
below where we are explicitly mentioning
that the field separator is colon and
then asking the script to print the
first field
in the code block which is executed
without any pattern which means it is
executed for every line that is read
from the command line
now let us look at
some examples
so that you understand the
processing of
input files using awk
so i have kept together some scripts
which i would be sharing with you on the
google drive for all the students
and you could modify these scripts for
your purpose
and these illustrate various features of
awk
as covered in this particular lecture so
let us look at the first script
so the first example is block example
which is very simple
it just simply
does one
print statement
to illustrate how many times each code
block is being processed
so you see there are three code blocks
here
this is a pattern
and this is the action
and this combination of pattern and
action are coming three times
two times it is coming with a keyword
once with begin keyword
once with the end keyword and then there
is another action
code block without any pattern in front
of the code block which means that this
will be processed for every line in the
input stream
so let us run this and the file over
which we will be running this code
is also available
so it is the input file all dot input
files are meant for
providing some test input for those
respective scripts
so it is a very simple input file which
i have already kept the line numbers for
your
reference and you can see that there are
three lines which means that when i run
the awk file on this particular input
how many times each code block will run
will actually illustrate how awk works
i have already indicated the executable
which is the interpreter for the aux
script as g awk so i can ask which is
awk or
okay and i can also
look at what is that arc and you can see
it's a symbolic link
and
and you see that ultimately it is being
pointing
uh to the g only so i have kept that as
interpreter and minus f option is to
tell that the script is coming from a
file
so what we do now is to execute the
awk
file and
we have to follow the script with the
file in which the
example
input is coming
and you see that the begin block has
been executed once
and it is coming in the beginning which
means that
the begin block is executed before any
line from the file is read
and then there are three lines that are
being read so for each of those lines
the default action without the pattern
in front of the code block is processed
once per each line and then once the
file has been read completely then the
end block is processed so this is the
sequence the begin once and then as many
times as the lines of the input the code
block without any pattern will be
processed after that the end block will
be processed now let us test this by
doing the same thing in a slightly
different manner
so i could pipe
the
input
also using this
so it would have exactly the same
outcome
now i will go ahead
now i will go ahead and edit the input
file to
add one more line
and you should see what will happen
so there are four lines so you could see
that
we now expect the default block to be
processed four times because there are
four lines so for each line it is being
processed
once
look at the code so this is the
default block which is processed once
per line that has been read and before
the input stream is
read
the begin block will be executed and
after the input stream has been
completely processed then the end block
is processed now in any script you can
have as many begins and ends also they
will all work as if you have just given
them in separate parts of the same begin
block so that also we could test now
so
i would
copy the begin block after the last and
i say
another
piece of code for the begin block
okay and i will also copy the end block
a second time
and i will put it in beginning
okay so we now have two end blocks and
two begin blocks and one code block so
let us see what would happen with this
so you see that the begin block has been
processed so you have seen the one which
is there in the front and then later the
second part of that and then the default
action block is processed four times
once per each line
end block which came at the beginning of
the script has been processed after that
the last one so the end blocks are
processed in the same sequence that we
have given in the file so this is the
first statement which has been processed
and then this statement so
the multiple begin blocks and multiple
end blocks are interpreted as if they
are portions of
the same set of actions that have to be
taken at the beginning and at the end of
processing the input stream respectively
now what about the line that is being
processed so we could also look at that
so what we do is clean it up a bit
and this line
i would print a variable called
dollar 0 which represents the line that
is being processed we don't need
the
semicolons at the end of every statement
unless we want to join multiple
statements on a single line
and here you would see
that the default action is processed for
every line the line is going to be
printed
so you see that every line is being
printed here so i would
show you the input as well so for every
line
the default action is
being processed
and that's four times for the four lines
respectively and the
begin block and the end block are done
just once so this is the model of
execution of awk language so you can
imagine
how we can put to use
when we want to process the
records or lines containing fields
so we just came across one variable
dollar zero which represent the entire
line or the record that is being
processed right
at every
execution of the
action block so what are the other
variables let us have a look at them
so here are some variables that are
built into the awk language
so except for those arguments that come
with minus f and minus v options minus v
for the variables that are being set and
minus f for the
file name where the script has to be
read except for these all other
arguments applied to the script will be
available uh to the script through the
variables rxc and rgb rxc tells you the
count of the variables that are passed
on the shell
in the command line rv will contain a
list of the strings passed as command
and arguments and you can access them
from inside the script now all the
environment variables are also available
to the aux scripts via
the array nvrom and it's an associative
array that means it's a hash
and the name of the variable would be
the index and the value of the variable
will be available from the associative
array
now the file name that is currently
being processed is available using the
variable file name which means that if
you pass on multiple file names on the
command line
then each time the execution is moving
on
to the next file
then the variable file name will also be
reflecting
the name of the file that is being
processed
the field separator the number of fields
in the current record as split by the
field separator on that record how many
record are we processing currently
and then what is a output format to be
used to print out numbers in a pretty
manner and what is the field separator
to be used for the output and what
should be the record separator to print
the output
and then if there is any matching of the
strings done then what was the length of
the string that is matched what is the
starting point what is the starting
position of that particular matched
string
and then what is the separator to be
used for
the subscripts of the arrays all these
can be customized
using built-in variables of awk
and the entire record as we have just
now seen is available as a dollar zero
and then
the fields are available as dollar one
dollar two etcetera so dollar ten would
refer to the 10th field
in the
current record that is being processed
so these are the only two
variables that have dollar other
variables will not have dollar in front
of their name so here is a way by which
the
execution of aux scripts will be
happening
so every block would have a pattern and
then a procedure procedure containing
the code and enclosed by the braces the
pattern can be
keywords like begin or end as we have
seen just now it could be any general
expression
or it could be a regular expression it
could be a relational expression or it
could even be a pattern matching
expression
and one can also give a range
of the records to be processed using a
comma
and the procedure is like any code block
you could have things like variable
assignment array assignments input
output commands and built in functions
including mathematical functions and
then user defined functions which you
can write and even keep in a separate
file as a library and then control loops
like you know for loop while loop
if loop and so on so
the entire
programming environment is available
that you can use in the procedure and
then this
procedure will be applied to
all those records which match the
particular pattern that you are giving
in the front and this pattern is
optional which means that if you don't
give then the code block
will be called as a default block and it
will be applied to
every line
in the input string and if you have
more than one such block then all of
them will be applied in the sequence
they appear in the script file
of what we have seen for the blocks are
repeated here for you to
remember so the begin the begin block
would be executed once before the files
are read the end block will be executed
once after the files are read and both
of these can come anywhere in the script
they can come multiple times and they
can also contain program code within
those blocks
and such program code is typically used
to do some
initialization of variables but
it could also have
anything else that you would like to
compute
at the beginning of the
processing of input stream code blocks
that come with a pattern
they can have the patterns combined with
the
logical and or logical or or negation
operators
and you could also give a range of
records that could be processed
using a comma you could
you would have already seen that these
blocks are
processed for each record every time the
pattern evaluates to true and in case
the pattern is empty then the code block
is executed for every record and as you
can see that one
need not mention what is a pattern you
could actually just
give a set of instructions between
braces and that will be interpreted as a
default
action that will be performed on
every line of the input stream so there
are many operators that are available
which make the awk language almost a
complete programming language you have
got assignment operators which are given
in the
sequence of precedence then there are
logical operators algebraic operators
that will help you to do arithmetic
and relational operators for the strings
and for comparison purposes
operators are elaborated here you could
also have the
if then else loop in a
succinct form as it in as available in
the c language here also so expression
question mark a colon b
if the expression is true then a will be
returned if it is false then b will be
written so such
concise notations
for conditional expression are also
available in awk the availability of any
element in an array can also be tested
so it will be tested against the indices
of the array
and you could do a comparison
to
do a regular expression match you could
also negate that particular regular
expression match
you also have the unary operators for
arithmetic such as the plus plus
for the increment and minus minus per
decrement you could use it both as a
prefix as well as post fix so you could
have plus plus a or a plus plus and they
both will work and of course a dollar is
for referencing a particular field
which is coming from the inbuilt
variables
and another special operator is a blank
space so if you have
two variables separated by a blank then
it will be interpreted as you wanted to
concatenate those two
strings and in case you
add
0 to a string then the string will be
interpreted as a number
while assigning it to the left hand side
now the number of functions and commands
that are available is quite rich so we
have got the arithmetic operations
such as the sine cost and exponential
log etc and then you have got string
operations which are for splitting the
strings or
getting a substring
converting the case of the characters in
the string
and matching a
regular expression with the string and
so on and you also have loops
that use the control flow
various type of loops that you have seen
in shell scripts
all those are also available in awk
input output functions are available for
printing or to read
input from a shell command that is
executed in the background
and you also have ability to write your
own functions and bitwise operators are
also available for fast execution
so that way the awk language is
fairly comprehensive
and if you learn it
understanding the way it executes
then you can put it to a very good use
now let us look at the other examples
to illustrate the execution model of awk
so here is a code which
tells you how to use the variables
so here the dollar zero would give you
the entire record
that is the whole
line that has been read
and fnr
would
tell you how manyth line are we
currently processing
and that line is split according to the
default field separator namely the space
and as per that splitting how many
fields are available in the current
record so you could see these three
lines being repeated for every input
line
and then these two
being done only once
at the beginning and at the end
respectively
so the input file which contains the
records that are being processed is here
so here is input file so you have got
three lines with three different
number of fields
so that we can illustrate that through
the output so let us go ahead and
execute that
so when you execute you can see from
here
that
the begin action was performed at the
beginning
after that we have got the pattern of
three lines output for every line of the
input stream so here it says that the
number of fields is four you can see
line one word one a word one b one word
one
b
so you have got like there are there are
four fields that are being reported and
this is the first line now when you come
to the second line
you see that here it says that the
fnr value is 2 and the number of fields
is 3
so that is also seen from here number of
fields is 3
and when you come to the last line so it
says the
number of fields is 2. so here you can
see the number of bits is 2 and the fnr
value is 3 that means it is the third
line in the input string that we are
talking about and then
the end
action block has been performed so this
is the execution model
and we can then use
the input
lines to
execute the code block
as we require we can look at the
patterns based upon which the actions
will be taken using the
next example
so here is a
example where we are using the regular
expression
in front of the action block so this is
the action block the first action block
this is the second action block
this is the third action block
this is the end block and this is the
begin block okay so
this action block will be performed on
all those
records
which satisfy a pattern matching as
mentioned here which means that it
should contain
alphabetic characters so if the line has
an alphabetic character this executable
this action will be executed
if the line has alpha numeric characters
then the second
action will be executed
if the line has any digits then the
third block will be executed so what is
the example
input stream that we are trying it out
so here is the example input file where
the first line does not have any digits
so we don't expect the third block to be
executed on it
the second one has alphanumeric
characters the third one has
mix of all three and then the last line
has only digits which does not have
alphabetical characters and therefore
the first block should not be executed
on it so let us test this out
after the begin block
the record 1 has been executed by two
blocks
alpha block and aluminum block that is
alphabetical as well as alpha numeric
because the first line has
alphabetical characters
now if you look at the second
line
all the three blocks have been executed
because it has both
alphabetical characters as well as
digits so it would satisfy alpha
alpha as well as digit patterns of
character matching
the third block
is also similar because it would
actually have
all the three types of characters in
that particular block
now if you take the last block
then it has only the digits which means
it will be satisfied by alnum or digit
so only those two blocks have been
executed and after this was over the end
block has been executed so this shows
you how you can pick which of the
records should be processed by which
code block
we have taken the pattern matching to
one level further complexity so instead
of trying to match the entire record
with the pattern we are trying to match
only the first field
that means that the very first
field in the record will be looked at
whether it is a alphabetical character
or alpha numeric or digit and then
accordingly the code will be executed so
here the pattern is having a relational
match
that is the first field is matched with
the regular expression that we have
provided
input stream that we are trying to test
it on is here
where we have got different words in the
first field so i have got only the
alphabetical character
and then i have got alpha numeric and
then purely numeric and purely numeric
so you can now test
how this will be working out
so you can see that
the first
record has been processed by alpha and
alum because you can see that the first
line has hello will fit pattern matching
with
alpha as well as alum so it has
alphabetical characters so both will be
satisfied
now look at the second record the first
field is mm-22 b901 it has both the
digits as well as alphabetical
characters so it will be executed by all
the three blocks alpha alone as well as
digital
okay in the third line six lakh 36 is
the first field which will fit
either with aluminum pattern or with a
digit pattern so only those two blocks
are being
executed
okay so only two blocks are being
executed for the third record for the
fourth record you see again only
a number is there so the same way it has
been executed by only alum block as well
as digit block so here you can see
that
this is the unknown block
and this is a digit block so which means
that only when the
first field is alphabetical alpha
numeric or digit
or comprised of digits then the second
and third blocks are executed and if the
first field is purely alphabetical
characters then the first block is
executed so we can actually do a
comparison on any specific field within
that particular record and then
ask the
action block to be executed on that
particular record so here we have got
one more example where we
do not do any pattern matching or
comparison but we actually look at the
number of fields in that particular
record so nf corresponds to the number
of fields so
in this script we are looking at the
number of records and if the records is
num more than two then the first block
is executed here
and if the number of records is less
than or equal to then the second block
is executed now the field separator is
being given in terms of a regular
expression where the
square brackets tell you what are the
different options so the space
the
dot symbol the semicolon
the colon and the hyphen all of them are
being given so what is the input
stream you can see that the input stream
is such that it has
all the different types of fields
separate it has got a colon here it has
got a semicolon here it got it has got a
hyphen here
it has a space here
and it has a dot here in the email
address so depending upon which
character you would like to choose the
number of fields will be different
so if i choose all of them then what
happens is that every single
word or roll number or pin code or
telephone number parts of the
email all of them will be split number
of fields will be decided accordingly so
if you now run this
you will see that the first line would
have
one two three four five five right okay
the second would have three
the third one will have again three
the fourth line would have
three
the fifth line would have again
okay so
what we will do is now we will edit the
script to
make the field separator slightly
more restrictive
what we would do is we will not allow
the space and the dot
as possible options
and you now see that the number of
fields have been different so you can
see that the last line is being treated
as just one record because the
field separator is not having dot
as one of the possibilities
now what i would do is i will change
this to only a space
and you now see that
the default field separation now would
give you three fields for the first line
because there is
there are there are only two spaces
between welcome two and then two and awk
and then the second line does not have
any space so only one record
third line doesn't have any space it has
only hyphens so only one record
the fourth line has two spaces so there
are three records
and then the last line has only email
address and no space so therefore it's
only one record so
by looking at the input stream you need
to decide what would be the suitable
field separator
to split the record into the fields as
you desire luckily you can change it
during the execution of the script also